okay well good afternoon everybody
welcome to this uh saturday afternoon
talk
and i've chosen to talk about the
barwell meteorite actually this was uh
prompted by sandra who lives near
leicester uh and barwell is just around
the corner from there
and who uh remembers the event i think
um
so uh suggested that we ought to talk
about it so i did some research and
sandra and i visited barwell and had a
little look around and saw some of the
evidence that's still available
so anyway the barwell meteorite
sorry someone's just joining the ball
right
so this goes back to christmas eve of
and uh at the time you may well have
been hiding behind
the
uh sofa because doctor who and the
daleks with the original doctor who here
was uh
very much uh in vogue at the time and
terrifying everybody
but in the afternoon of christmas eve
this particular year in leicestershire
uh meteor described as being the size of
a turkey blew up
over the lies of leicester
and uh
created the largest observed fall of
meteorites in uk history there have been
other falls but this one was actually uh
witnessed by people live
so
also
on at the time very topically
showing
it was the movie night caller from the
outer solar system an alien machine from
ganymede moon of jupiter was uh
supposed to be invading the earth at the
time so this was
very indicative of the sci-fi programs
of the time there i love that uh
space creatures snatch girls to
mysterious planet
knight caller from outer space etc uh
very typical of these
1960s b movies
but at 16 30
kabum mr crow described a bright flash
and a loud bang followed by a swish and
a thud and several more thuds
occurring
jim andrews said all of a sudden there
was a tremendous bang a roaring noise
that shook the buildings and said it was
awful
out at the time
carol singing were a group of ladies
and uh one of them rosemary leader
noticed that underfoot there was very
much
a layer of sort of crunchy gravel on the
paths
and she picked a piece up
but not wanting to carry it around with
her threw it away again unfortunately
uh not wanting to uh clutter up her
pockets but uh
very much uh the case that uh obviously
a lot of fragments had landed on the
ground and
strewn themselves
all over the place
the first recorded damage was a broken
window shown here in the picture and
this is the mr and mrs grucock
slightly an unlikely name there but
never mind um
and they noticed a fragment of something
had come flying through the window
their window much to their chagrin
and so this was also the first
official report because they thought
somebody had been throwing stones
and reported the event to the local
policeman of bobby
pc scott
but he had also seen the flash in the
sky and so actually was a little bit
more clued up as to maybe what was going
on
however they didn't immediately manage
to find the object that had come through
the window
it took 19 days before they located it
it had managed to bounce around the room
and land in a flower of ours which was
an excellent place for a piece of rock
to hide and this is uh
pc scott holding it being inspected to
uh
show that it is in fact a piece of the
meteorite
and i've got a clip of a piece of film
with uh the bbc here interviewing uh mr
grucock so let's just listen to that
i hope this comes through okay one of
the people who actually saw them be
trying for on christmas eve was mr
joseph brewkop mr blucock what were you
doing at the time i went out the back
back of our house
and uh i read the bank
and uh then i came in and like my wife
says uh have you not the billboard or so
i said no
so he said well i ate some glass though
so uh about ten minutes after i went
into the front room and seen the window
was smacked
well then uh i i came outside and seen a
piece on the on the court see i picked
this piece up and it was red off i
thought it down again
so
i looked around i seen a lot in the road
and i thought it dropped off for a worry
of course i never thinking thought no
more about it tell the white watchers it
came in
and uh as it happened you
again the house and held it down against
ears
and they thought it was back in the war
again
sorry about the person shouting taxi in
the background there but uh that's in
the original film
um the
interesting thing there with mr grucock
is he reported that he saw the fragment
on the ground
picked it up presumably with his bare
hands and then says it were red hot so i
dropped it again
well actually we know that
pieces of meteorite when they come in
from outer space there of course the
meteorite is very very cold at minus 250
degrees c
and
although they appear to generate a
bright flash when they're in the sky
the amount of heat liberated during that
time
is quite small because it's a very very
quick event
so it heats the air that it's pushing
out of the way and heats the surface of
the meteorite but the core of the thing
remains cold and so it's much more
likely that what he was feeling was the
very very low temperature creating a
sort of burning from frostbite when he
picked it up
anyway the first
uh actual piece to be recovered was
found on the road
because it had hit the driveway of one
of his neighbors and created a small
crater in the tarmac
so here's the picture showing the crater
and it was probably one of the fragments
from this impact that then went on to
break
mr grucock's window
second fragment to be found actually hit
a car this is one of those rare events
where a motor vehicle gets struck by one
of these things it hit the bonnet of the
vauxhall viva belonging to a mr percy
england uh i think this is not his car
it's just a similar one i don't think
they actually have a photograph of uh
his particular box old viva
but it punched through the uh bite and
destroyed the engine he actually
fractured the cylinder head
in annoyance he then threw the object
away which was very foolish of him
because it would have been worth
something perhaps
then he tried to claim on the insurance
to get the car repaired but the
insurance company of course
went on to say
it's an act of god meteorites are
defined by insurance companies to be one
of those act of god events that they
don't take responsibility for
um
so mr england went off up to the church
and decided he would try and get them to
pay for his repairs
you know what happened they sent him
away
clearly they were not going to pick up
the tab so
that term act of god doesn't really mean
what it says anyway
that was all the first day the first uh
incidents
the next day christmas day
a search was organized and people from
leicester museum the university of
leicester the uk geological society and
the natural history museum all turned up
to barwell and searched and started
collecting fragments so this is one of
the pieces they found on christmas day
here
6th of january
dr ford at leicester university found a
large fragment
not far from mr crow and mr greek ox
houses on what is now uh
a field but was the common and there
were some allotments there and this is
them digging uh they piece out of the
ground
and
they gradually managed to accumulate a
total by the 9th of january of about 20
kilograms of the the object in in
varying sizes
and so it seems like the thing to do
then really was to catalogue all the
pieces
and
they tried to do a reassembly so in
early february they got all the pieces
together and tried to put the jigsaw
back together to see how the pieces had
all uh separated from each other out of
the large
single object that came into the
atmosphere
didn't get very far though only two
actually managed to be
found that had a clear fit
so really suggesting that there were a
large number of pieces that had not yet
been found
um and that's a very interesting
uh
part of the puzzle and so obviously the
thing to do is try and find more of it
so they actually organized a small
bounty to pay people to hand in more
pieces if they could uh get hold of them
and it worked lots more fragments were
duly picked up
including one piece
7.7 kilograms that had buried itself
into the ground
recreation pavilion gone in 75
centimeters that's uh
quite a deep penetration into the earth
and needed uh some shovel work to get it
back out again
so let's just uh listen to these guys
um
how large would you say it was when it
actually fell well we can say that we've
collected now
50 pounds perhaps but the slices have
been very much larger than that almost
certainly there are still many chunks
lying about in the fields around here
still to be found
we hope that
members of the public will help us by
looking for these
and
offending the
specimens they
discover
we can get them all together as a
british museum and find out just how
large and what shape this big stone was
very interesting there he's handling
that uh
very large piece of it with no gloves
not taking any precautions about
contaminating it with the acid from his
fingers and so forth today nobody would
even think of touching a piece of this
object without gloves
so
patrick moore himself decided to
go up and have a look
and he found a chunk and offered a big
museum
sorry there's a lot of background noise
thank you
so patrick went up and offered
well he found a piece and said
that he would give it to the museum but
they said uh we've got plenty of it so
you can keep it
uh as long as
when you pass away you leave it back to
us in your will so here's patrick
holding the piece that he had on
semi-permanent loan there in the
photograph
but once the story was out and into the
media meteorite hunters descended on the
village from all over the place
and started inflating the prices that
were being offered for
bits of meteorite
harold platt
he found a larger piece kept it on top
of his piano for a while but eventually
agreed to sell it for just under 40
pounds
uh now i don't know what 40 pounds in
1965 would have been worth but it's uh a
fairly substantial sum of money as
enough that they say to for him to have
gone on a week's holiday um
whether that was a a week in uh
blackpool or something i presume in
those days
however
in 2005 a one kilogram chunk of the
meteorite was valued at 20 000 pounds
so if you did have a fairly large piece
lying around somewhere
and you live in barwell
it might be worth getting it valued
so what was it well it's obviously the
case that these things are taken into
the laboratory and then examined closely
uh chemically
small slices are taken uh put under the
microscope and examined in great detail
and the experts all decided that it was
what's called an l-type
chondrite
well what does that mean
well when you look inside the meteorite
or you look at the surface of it
you see lots and lots of these little
tiny round grains of silicate
embedded within it all these little
orange colored bits and the gray bits
these little round droplets those are
called crown jewels uh they're little
little spherules of uh of material from
the original solar nebula out of which
all of those the planets and the sun and
everything in the solar system was made
so originally the
cloud of material around the young sun
would have been formed of just lots and
lots of these little tiny droplets that
had condensed as they cooled from a
vapor
down into a liquid and then solidified
as these little round
droplets out in space before then
gravity gradually did its work and
brought them together to form larger
accretions
and that's whatever increasing process
the larger the lump the more gravity it
has the more it tends to accumulate
larger pieces
so we have quite a lot of chondrites on
earth of different types it refers to
the fact they contain these inclusions
here's another photograph of a piece of
the bar oil meteorite you can see the
black fusion crust so this was on the
outside of the meteorite when it was
coming through
the atmosphere this was the layer that
got superheated but the rest of this has
been untouched and would have been very
much
that sort of super chilled temperatures
when it reached the ground
now some of these uh chondrites are
actually older than the earth we've got
uh some pieces that date back to about
six billion years ago
dating back only 4.5 billion years ago
but the l-type chondrites are a
particular group
and the
interestingly
38 of all the meteorites that land on
earth are of this type so it's a very
very common fragment
um it was interesting that perhaps you
would think well barwell might be a very
unusual meteorite but it's not it's
perhaps an example
of the most common type of meteorite of
all
it's got evidence of shock in it and
i'll show you that in a minute
it means that it was broken away from a
parent body in some sort of ancient
impact event
so although the material itself is
mostly made of this unmodified uh grains
from the early solar nebula it had got
together to form a larger asteroid
of some sort large space rock and then
been broken off it again
in an enormous explosion this shows
really what a violent place the early
solar system was
here's a
scan through a thin section of it under
the microscope and you can see the
amazing detailed structure inside it
let's go in a bit closer
you can see how the crystals many of
them are fragmented and cracked
uh you can see all these
fractures through the the individual
grains
this is what i mean by it's been shocked
there was a huge uh ex event that
blasted this piece off of the main
asteroid and all of the quartz crystals
and so on that are making it up have got
the evidence of that huge shock wave
passing through we see that in
rocks that have been exposed to
nuclear explosions or other impacts on
the earth
there's a is another view of it where
we've used a cross polar
microscope to give a sort of color
contrast to the different grains you can
see some of this is uh silvery gray
metallic iron mixed in with the rock
grains and the iron sulfide coming
through there in in yellow in the uh
mineral called
trollite
so where do these uh chondrites come
from well
there are three subclasses of them
that we can trace back actually to
each to a different
parent asteroid body and it's amazing
that we can do this
in each case that parent
was blasted
in an impact and the fragments
thrown out across space
the first class is the h class of
crondite
not the barwell meteorite and these come
from asteroid number six eb and the h
actually rather unimaginatively stands
for high in metals h for high
so it should be no surprise that the l
class
meteorites come from somewhere else and
mean low in metal
and the place that they come from is the
flora family of asteroids so number
eight flora quite a big one slightly
smaller
43 ariadne and 433 eros are examples of
the flora family of asteroids that all
exhibit the same material as these
l-class um
meteorites
and then finally there's the ll class
guess what that means it means very low
in metal
and the chileabinsk meteorite that blew
up over russia in 2013 that was a an
example of an ll meteorite but the
barwell
meteorite is l-class from the flora
family
we can figure that all that out because
if we look at the
oxygen content of these meteorites
we can plot how much of the heavy
isotope of oxygen oxygen 18 along the
bottom axis here and the y-axis contains
the percentage of
oxygen isotope 17 and you can see the
l-class ones are in purple and cluster
right in the middle here the h ones
further down and the ll's up to the top
here and the bar well one is indicated
by the cross with the big arrow pointing
at it so it's slap bang right in the l
class
and that tells us it's part of this
flora family
now i said that the crown jewels and
they
date right back to the formation of the
solar system
but
when we date other crystals within the
barwell meteorite we get a different age
what we actually do is look at
uranium and see how rapidly the
radioactive atoms of uranium decay into
un
radioactive lead
and the original uranium is captured
into a crystal when it solidifies that's
a very selective process so you get
all uranium and no lead
but gradually over time the uranium
atoms turn into lead atoms and so if you
look at the same crystal years later you
can see
the ratio of uranium to lead and knowing
the
radioactive half-life of
uranium you can work out
how long it has been since that crystal
formed out of a molten droplet of liquid
and the date we get back is as it shows
on the screen there
467 million years ago
that's
much much younger than
the age we were talking about
going back to the beginning of the solar
system 4.5
billion years ago 10 times further back
in time than this date of 467
and when we also look at the meteorite
we we can see that it has undergone some
transformation
as a result of pressure and temperature
so the chronicles
might be from the original
material dating way back to the
origins of the solar system but clearly
the whole ensemble was part of a larger
asteroid that was big enough to start
the process of forming a core
in the center
the radio activity and heat trapped
from the result of the impacts of uh one
body on another
melts the core
and then you find that the
heavier denser metals sink to the core
and the lighter rock floats to the
surface
and so you get a differentiated planet
like earth and of course the bigger the
planet the more inclined it is to do
this but what we figure out from the
amount of melting that's gone on is that
the parent body of the flora family and
all the l-chondrites would have been a
small baby planet around 200 kilometers
across
so large enough to generate a little bit
of this differentiation process a little
bit of mild better for uh metamorphosis
but not enough to go the whole way and
form a fully cored planet like the earth
and then
467 million years ago
something very violent happened to that
baby planet
it was impacted by another object at
very high speed and shattered into all
of the fragments that we detect
either on earth or out there in space
today
it was orbiting around in the asteroid
belt minding its own business and
suddenly another space rock hit it
and
that that created the enormous shock
waves that we see that are responsible
for the crystal structure and blew
thousands millions in fact of fragments
all over the solar system
they created asteroid flora the largest
chunk of the survivor 57 percent of the
total mass we think
ariadne just nine percent and the rest
of the flora family has 13 000 members
that we know about out there all
hurtling around the solar system
and it makes up about one in 20 of the
total asteroids in the
whole of the asteroid belt now are part
of this flora family
flora itself orbits out there
um
between mars and jupiter it's quite big
it's 146 kilometers in diameter making
it the 10th largest asteroid that we
know
um and it has that correct
surface mixture of silicates and nickel
iron exactly like we find for the uh
l chondrites it's very nearly round very
nearly spherical
so not quite large enough for gravity to
have uh forced it into a fully round
object but it's getting there
um
and it's 80 percent of the total mass of
the remaining flora family so this is
really the the large piece that uh
survived and all the other fragments
were blown everywhere
we know a lot about one of them number
951 gaspara because the galileo probe
visited it uh on the way out to
jupiter on its mission there and
interestingly that object gaspara
dated slightly younger
so it may have had another collision
since uh the main fragmenting of the
parent of the flora family
now i looked up about flora and it
appears in some uh more of that b movie
science fiction the green slime are
coming
is a 1968 film
talking about the green slime
uh following flora coming into collision
with the earth so it seems that uh
there's certainly
no escape from these sorts of uh
movies
featuring in this story
just a little word then about the the
asteroid families that we know about
we can identify them in several ways and
this is a nice plot here
this is the distance from the sun from
uh measured in units of multiples of the
earth's uh
sun distance that would be one so mars
is at about two here and jupiter would
be off to the right at five so this is
most of the main asteroid belt and you
can see colored in blue here these are
all the flora
family
and all the others are colored in as you
can see with their names on them so the
vesta family and so on
and
so we've plotted the distance from the
sun along the bottom and the orbital
eccentricity so how elliptical the orbit
is
and this separates them into these
different orbital groups
and what you have to imagine here is
that these fragments they were all part
of one object that was traveling around
the sun with a certain orbit and a
certain amount of momentum and then a
big
impact on it happened and blasted all
these fragments but they share mostly
that same momentum and that same path
around the sun as they original parent
and so they're all traveling together in
very much like a shotgun blast it's been
fired out of the end of a shotgun all
traveling together around the sun in a
group
that's not to say that there weren't
other fragments that went in other
directions these are just the ones that
are still there more or less in the same
orbit other fragments would have gone uh
in in wild and random directions around
the solar system
and the other way we can identify them
is to look at them
with
spectroscopy and see what they're made
of and classify them and you can see
that the different spectral types c m s
v e etc here just uh names for the
different groups
c for series in this particular thing
here but it's also c for carbon because
there's quite a lot of carbon in these
s for sulfur uh 433 eros that was one of
the l class
uh
flora family that we looked at just now
so the flora family itself
was responsible for something rather
important
as well
normally about a hundred tons a day of
material falls into the earth's
atmosphere that adds up to about 40 000
tons a year
so it's quite an accumulation but
suddenly one day 467 and a half million
years ago the number of in-falling
meteorites went up by a factor of 3 000
times
suddenly the earth was absolutely
bombarded by meteorites
here's a plot that shows the number of
meteorite strikes that we know about
over time now
the fact that there are none right back
here might be that we haven't detected
them but the interesting part is this
graph in more recent times where the
data is a bit more certain and you can
see the number was going along and
suddenly shot up here
and then went down again the reason it
goes up of course towards the end is
it's easier to know about the younger
ones so the the exponential rise there
that's showing that's the observational
selection
problem of uh it's easier to know about
uh more recent ones than older ones
because the evidence disappears but
clearly here there was a massive spike
compared to the background rate
and we have evidence for that
there's a cliff here in india
and you can see going along the cliff
i'll point it out with the mouse pointer
along this line here
there is a black line running along the
cliff
this dark grey material
is absolutely packed with asteroid dust
fragments and bits of meteor
and the bits of meteor that it comprises
are the l-type crondites
so the exact same material as the
barwell meteor
and there were millions and millions of
these impacts all over the earth
for a very short period of time
this date of course matches the date
that we got from the uranium lead
content of the barwell fragment and is
the is telling us the date
at which the flora parent body
underwent that impact and was blasted
into a trillion pieces and an awful lot
of those came like a shotgun blast
across the solar system and landed over
the earth
back at the time this period is in the
middle of the ordovician era 488 to 444
million years ago so 467 is in the
middle of that and the sea was full of
these uh lovely creatures the
nautilloids um and the sea spiders and
so on are
making their way around they'd evolved
uh
from the very early and pre-cambrian
times about 100 million years before
and been diversifying into all these
wonderful creatures
but 467
million years ago or so they had this
very bad day when all these meteors came
in
here is
a meteor
meteorite fragment and this is a piece
of fossilized nautiloid up in the top of
the photograph here and here's another
fragment here trapped in the same
rock
so
these dates to this this time when
a very large
increase in the amount of uh in falling
material occurred
and
to a massive mass extinction
the
temperatures across the earth nose dived
the ice advanced once more from the
poles towards the equator accelerating
the cooling as it reflected more
sunlight back into space
sea level plummeted as water was locked
up in ice in the form of glaciers on
land
and started freezing out of the
atmosphere reducing its greenhouse
effect making it even colder
so it was a sort of triple whammy this
one
triggered by all of that dust in the
atmosphere from all of these in-falling
objects
a sort of nuclear winter effect blotting
out the sun for thousands and thousands
of years and creating one of the largest
mass extinction events that we know
about
in addition to the uh
the
asteroid fragments in the rock we've
also got quite a few large craters that
date to that period this is canada the
clearwater lakes the east lake
26 kilometers across
uh it is um
dated to that time four six five million
years ago part of the flora bombardment
as we call it
uh the other crater is much younger 286
million years and came at a different
time
we also found
craters
on the historic
continent of baltica so down here what
was scandinavia what would become
scandinavia norway and sweden here one
two three four five
um different craters all dating to this
same period here
so craters form
fairly regularly but suddenly there was
a hot a flock of uh
craters all caused by this el chondra
parent body the flora family
event
coming down and all of those craters
would have got thrown more dust and dirt
up into the atmosphere and been part of
the reason for this uh enormous mass
extinction
sixty percent of all that marine life
died
but
life's very resilient and it came back
again
in and
diversified again during the second half
of the ordovician era until
444 million years ago when the
ordovician gives way to the next period
in time which is the silerian
and that too what
marked a second mass extinction event
in fairly short order and this time we
think it was caused by the explosion of
a very large star
a hyper giant star blew up about 6 000
light years away so you'd think that
would be far enough away to be safe but
it
was such a large star it gave off a
gamma ray burst
and the gamma rays irradiated the
atmosphere and tended to
damage the creatures that were living
near the surface
of the sea but not really penetrating
any deeper than that and that was the
event that
uh wiped out uh quite a proportion of
the living creatures
giving rise to the end of that
ordovician era and the
re-creation the rebound of life again in
the soilurian
so this is an example of how some of
these astronomical events turn out to be
very very important in understanding the
evolution of life on earth
and of course
one of the most famous was the
uh chick salute event where 66 million
years ago a huge object smashed into
mexico on the yucatan peninsula
and
brought the dinosaurs to a rather sticky
end
hence the book here t-rex and the crater
of doom by walter alvarez who was one of
the scientists who
discovered this and here's the
radar map of the
resulting huge crater
but it's not the only crater
from around 66 million years ago we've
also got
three others the boltish crater in
ukraine the silver pit crater in the
north sea and the shiva
crater in the indian ocean
are all dated to around about that same
time period
and of course i'm mentioning it because
the chickasaw impactor was probably
another stray member of the flora family
so the flora family event has got more
than one
case of blood on its hands for creating
mass extinctions on the earth
so
chunks of that flora event are still
landing today
or at least in living memory
is the plaque
uh in barwell that says on christmas eve
in 1965 one of the largest meteor falls
recorded british history landed close to
this site
it says it's flaming arrival was
followed by a sonic boom before the 4.5
billion year old rock exploded into
hundreds of pieces
now that 4.5 billion year old figure is
lifted from the fact that it's uh got
those crondite uh crundles in it those
are certainly four and a half billion
years old but the rock itself is
arguably
467 and a half million years old from
that flora event
this chunk here this is in the national
space center and uh was uh one that was
found on the allotments just uh away
from mr crow's house and it buried
itself in the ground
now they're still celebrating the event
in uh barwell the 59th
uh
anniversary reunion occurred a few years
ago and is the reverend andy taylor from
the local church
the fragments of the
meteorite were brought back to the
church and people were able to come
along and see them and discuss the event
one of the chunks that you can actually
go and see is in the leicester museum
and there's yours truly pointing at it
and it's very proudly in its glass case
2.2 kilograms of it and this was the
chunk dug up on his allotment by uh
harold platts
there's a couple more photographs of it
for you from different angles
showing the different faces with the the
blackened
fusion crust from the outside of the
object
and then the fractures where the other
pieces have been blasted away from it
and they've got a couple of nice uh
posters up for the display here talking
about it telling you some of the facts
that i've already
gone through in this talk uh here's mr
grucock again pointing at his window and
the hole in the driveway there's the
hole on the driveway with the gate open
and pc uh scott holding the chunk and a
little map of barwell showing actually
individual dots they really could do
with this in color but these little
round dots mark not houses but where the
fragments were found so if you look at
this really closely you can see
where they were scattered and this is a
good example of what's called a strewn
field where the
meteor blows up
in the atmosphere due to the intense
pressure of coming in so fast gradually
into thicker and thicker air and
eventually the uh stress fractures it
into uh a million pieces um and you get
a sort of shotgun blast of it landing on
the earth
and as yours truly stood by the green
plaque um that they have
on
another piece of rock that is not part
of the meteorite the meteorite wasn't
that big and heavy i guess it's that big
so that nobody pinches it by mistake but
it's just mounted in a piece of local
stone there
um
you can
sort of
go on to various meteorite sites and you
might want to try and buy a piece 65
quid a gram
at the moment
um here's a few pieces that were sold in
2020 at the auction in bonhams um and
they were
describing it very accurately and saying
well you want to spend nearly ten
thousand dollars on on this piece which
is a fairly sizable chunk so it's very
very valuable and still very sought
after today actually
and
here's another lovely photograph of it
against a copy of the leicester mercury
so i'll bring the talk to an end there
there's more to say about
other meteorites that have fallen in the
uk and it seems that on average in the
last hundred years or so we've had about
one of these falls every 10 years
and the most recent one of course was in
gloucestershire in 2021 the winchcom
meteorite but that's for another day so
thank you very much for listening and
i'll bring it to a close there